# Scratch

## Objectives

* Introduce some fundamental programming constructs.

* Empower you to design your own animation, game, or interactive art.

* Impress your friends.

## Bits

First curl up with Nate’s short on binary, if not too familiar:

<iframe width="711" height="400" src="http://www.youtube.com/embed/hacBFrgtQjQ" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

And then with Nate’s short on ASCII:

<iframe width="711" height="400" src="http://www.youtube.com/embed/UPlR4eMMCmI" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

Consider these questions rhetorical for now, but odds are they’ll come up again!

* How do you represent the (decimal) integer 50 in binary?

* How many bits must be "flipped" (i.e., changed from 0 to 1 or from 1 to 0)
  in order to capitalize a lowercase `a` that’s represented in ASCII?

* How do you represent the (decimal) integer 50 in, oh, "hexadecimal,"
  otherwise known as "base-16"? Know that decimal is considered "base-10"
  (since it employs 10 digits, 0 through 9), and binary is considered
  "base-2" (since it employs 2 digits, 0 and 1). Infer from those base
  systems how to represent base-16! (We’ll see base-16 again in the context
  of graphics and web design.)

Next dive into Allison’s short on Scratch:

<iframe width="711" height="400" src="http://www.youtube.com/embed/52JoFF4HMA4" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

No questions on that one, though, for now!

## Itching to Program?

Now join Zamyla for a walkthrough of this problem set, if you’d like a bit of
a tour:

<iframe width="711" height="400" src="http://www.youtube.com/embed/697pD31GCZg" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

Next head to and sign up for an account on MIT’s website by clicking **Join
Scratch** atop the page. Any username (that’s available) is fine, but take
care to remember it and your choice of password.

Then head to and take note of the resources available to you before you dive
into Scratch itself. In particular, you might want to skim the [Getting
Started Guide][10].

Next head to to see **Scratch Scratch Revolution** by CS50 alumna Ann Chi,
which Vanessa played on stage in Week 0. Click the blue square above the
game’s top-left corner if you’d like to full-screen the user interface (UI).
Then click either of the green flags. Per Ann’s instructions, as soon as you
hit your keyboard’s spacebar, the game will begin! Feel free to procrastinate
a bit. And if you’d like to try out Frogger, by CS50 alumnus Blake Walsh,
head to .

If you’ve no experience (or comfort) whatsoever with programming, rest
assured that Ann’s and Blake’s projects are more complex than what we expect
for this first problem set. (Click **See inside** in Scratch’s top-right
corner to look at each project’s underlying "implementation details.") But
they do reveal what you can do with Scratch. And if your computer has a
webcam, you might also want to try **Move the Butterfly** at . Recall from
Week 0 how that program utilizes a webcam to detect movement to which sprites
can respond.

Let’s take a look at one other project. Head to to see a project you probably
haven’t yet seen by Carlos Herrera. Take a moment to play the game, then
click **See inside** in Scratch’s top-right corner to see how it’s
implemented. Spend some time looking over Carlos’s scripts. Don’t forget that
each sprite has its own set of scripts. Try to get a sense of how the overall
program works. Try making some changes, even while the program is running, to
see how the program responds. Note that this project is probably a bit
simpler than we expect of you for this problem set, but it’s a good one to
learn from because it’s pretty easy to follow. And do appreciate that this
game, like all Scratch projects, reduces quite literally to some basic
building blocks.

Feel free to download the source code for a few more projects, either from or
from Week 0 at , even if you already saw some of the latter in lecture. For
each program, run it to see how it works overall and then look over its
scripts to understand how it works underneath the hood. Feel free to make
changes to scripts and observe the effects. Once you can say to yourself,
"Okay, I think I get this," you’re ready to proceed.

Now it’s time to choose your own adventure! Your mission is, quite simply, to
have fun with Scratch and implement a project of your choice (be it an
animation, a game, interactive art, or anything else), subject only to the
following requirements.

* Your project must have at least two sprites, at least one of which must
  resemble something other than a cat.

* Your project must have at least three scripts total (i.e., not
  necessarily three per sprite).

* Your project must use at least one condition, one loop, and one variable.

* Your project must use at least one sound.

* Your project should be more complex than most of those demonstrated in
  lecture (many of which, though instructive, were quite short) but it can be
  less complex than, say, Scratch Scratch Revolution. As such, your project
  should probably use a few dozen puzzle pieces overall.

Feel free to peruse additional projects online for inspiration, but your own
project should not be terribly similar to any of them. Try to think of an
idea on your own, and then set out to implement it. But don’t try to
implement the entirety of your project all at once: pluck off one piece at a
time. Ann, for instance, probably implemented just one arrow first, before
she moved on to her game’s other three. And Carlos probably implemented a
stationary goal before he tried to make it move up and down on its own.

If, along the way, you find it too difficult to implement some feature, try
not to fret; alter your design or work around the problem. If you set out to
implement an idea that you find fun, you should not find it hard to satisfy
this problem set’s requirements.

Alright, off you go. Make us proud!

Once finished with your project, click **See project page** in Scratch’s
top-right corner. Ensure your project has a title (in Scratch’s top-left
corner), some instructions (in Scratch’s top-right corner), and some notes
and/or credits (in Scratch’s bottom-right corner). Then click **Share** in
Scratch’s top-right corner so that others (e.g., your TF!) can see your
project. Finally, take note of the URL in your browser’s address bar. That’s
your project’s URL on MIT’s website, and you’ll need to know it later.

Oh, and if you’d like to exhibit your project in Fall 2013’s gallery, head to
the [Scratch Gallery](http://scratch.mit.edu/studios/242332/), then click **Add projects**, and paste in your own project’s URL.

## How to Submit

Simply paste the URL to your Scratch project into the text box on the 
[submit tab](#submit).

This was Problem Set 0.
