# Course policies

## Collaboration

All work that you do toward fulfillment of this course's expectations must be
your own unless collaboration is explicitly allowed in writing by the course's
instructor. Collaboration in the completion of problem sets is not permitted
unless otherwise stated by some problem set's specification.

Viewing or copying another individual's work (even if left by a printer, stored
in an executable directory, or posted online) or lifting material from a book,
website, or other source—even in part—and presenting it as your own constitutes
academic dishonesty, as does showing or giving your work, even in part, to
another student or soliciting the work of another individual. Similarly is dual
submission academic dishonesty: you may not submit the same or similar work to
this course that you have submitted or will submit to another. Nor may you
provide or make available solutions to problem sets to individuals who take or
may take this course in the future. Moreover, submission of any work that you
intend to use outside of the course (e.g., for a job) must be approved by the
course's instructor.

You are welcome to discuss the course's material with others in order to better
understand it. You may even discuss problem sets with classmates, but you may
not share code. In other words, you may communicate with classmates in English,
but you may not communicate in, say, C. If in doubt as to the appropriateness
of some discussion, contact the course's instructor.

## Quoting sources

You may turn to the Web for instruction beyond the course's lectures and
sections, for references, and for solutions to technical difficulties, but not
for outright solutions to problems on problem sets or your own final project.
However, failure to cite (as with comments) the origin of any code or technique
that you do discover outside of the course's lectures and sections (even while
respecting these constraints) and then integrate into your own work may be
considered academic dishonesty.

## Regulations

All forms of academic dishonesty are dealt with harshly. If the course refers
some matter to the Examination Board, the course reserves the right to impose
local sanctions on top of that outcome for that student that may include, but
not be limited to, a failing grade for work submitted or for the course itself.

In all cases we follow the directives regarding fraud and plagiarism of the
University of Amsterdam and of the examination board of the Computer Science
BSc programme. Find them here in [English] and [Dutch].

[Dutch]: http://uva.nl/plagiaat
[English]: http://student.uva.nl/en/az/content/plagiarism-and-fraud/plagiarism-and-fraud.html
